Add Colima installation over Docker Desktop (#96)
cisagov/development-guide: dev_envs/mac-env-setup.md

xcode-select --install
```

### Docker ###

Download the latest stable [Docker for Mac](https://www.docker.com/docker-mac).
Install it by double-clicking the downloaded `dmg` file and dragging the
Docker application file to the `Applications` folder.

> 

Reviewer: Why not leave this section?  Some folks will be OK with installing Docker for Mac.

Reviewer 2: Is our team still the target audience for this document?  If so, I don't think we need the Docker for Mac section anymore.  If we ever purchase Docker, we can always add it back.

If the target audience is wider than our team, then I agree that we can leave it, maybe adding a sentence about the licensing.

Author: I was structuring it like @dav3r was suggesting. I can also see @jsf9k's point since the project is OSS and in an ideal situation outside contributions are encouraged. The question I have is are the components that they would use Docker for exclusive to CISA VPN's, AWS accounts, etc.? If that is the case then I suppose it wouldn't really matter if they had Docker or Colima if they can't really make any of the components work with it unless they just want to use it for their own sandbox environment type stuff.

Author: @dav3r and @jsf9k any consensus? I am leaning towards leaving it in but just wanted to check with you all for final decision.

Reviewer: I vote for leaving it in, but adding an italicized paragraph at the very beginning of the section that states _Note that [Colima](link_to_Colima_section) is our preferred solution on ~OSX~ macOS._

Reviewer: Also note that the download is now called "Docker Desktop on Mac".  Note the addition of "Desktop" _and_ the modified preposition.

Reviewer 2: > I vote for leaving it in, but adding an italicized paragraph at the very beginning of the section that states _Note that [Colima](link_to_Colima_section) is our preferred solution on OSX._

I'm fine with that approach, but will note that "macOS" is the current modern nomenclature vs. "OSX".

Author: @jsf9k and @dav3r I made the fix here: https://github.com/cisagov/development-guide/pull/96/commits/a7d7d8e99dc3f1bab1c450aee87e9d8bfb4c39cc

Reviewer: See [this tweak suggestion](https://github.com/cisagov/development-guide/pull/96#discussion_r1497979493).

Author: @jsf9k consider it done

Reviewer 2: @jsf9k - Can this conversation be resolved?

### Docker ###

> > **Note**
> > *[Colima](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima) is our preferred solution on macOS.*

Reviewer: I think this renders a little better, and note that I changed the Colima link to point to the relevant section of this document:
```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> [Colima](#colima-a-docker-alternative) is our preferred solution on macOS.
```

packages. We recommend installing all the packages specified in the
[CISA `laptop` script repository](https://github.com/cisagov/laptop/blob/master/Brewfile).

### Colima: A Docker alternative ###

For individuals or businesses seeking a container solution without

> the licensing conditions associated with [Docker](https://www.docker.com/pricing/faq/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the licensing conditions associated with [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/pricing/faq/)
```

uninstall it before proceeding.

**Installation Steps:**

1. Install Colima and Docker command-line tools using Homebrew:

    ```console
    brew install colima docker docker-compose
    ```

1. Verify the installation by starting Colima:

    ```console
    colima start
    ```

    This initializes the Docker daemon within a lightweight VM.
    The first startup may take a moment.

1. Confirm Docker is operational:

    ```console
    docker
    ```

    You should see the Docker usage menu.

1. Verify `docker-compose` is working:

    ```console
    docker-compose
    ```

    The `docker-compose` usage menu should appear.

### Optional configurations ###

Enhance your Colima setup with the following optional configurations:

#### Docker Compose as a Docker plugin ####

Convert `docker-compose` to a Docker plugin for streamlined commands:

1. Create a directory for Docker CLI plugins:

    ```console
    mkdir -p ~/.docker/cli-plugins
    ```

1. Symlink the `docker-compose` command:

    ```console
    ln -sfn $(brew --prefix)/opt/docker-compose/bin/docker-compose ~/.docker/cli-plugins/docker-compose
    ```

1. Verify by running:

    ```console
    docker compose
    ```

>     Ensure the `docker-compose` usage menu is displayed.

Reviewer 2: Minor, but we might as well be consistent:
```suggestion
    Ensure the `docker compose` usage menu is displayed.
```

packages. We recommend installing all the packages specified in the
[CISA `laptop` script repository](https://github.com/cisagov/laptop/blob/master/Brewfile).

> ### Colima: A Docker Alternative ###

Reviewer: We use sentence case for second-level headings and below:
```suggestion
### Colima: A Docker alternative ###
```

For individuals or businesses seeking a container solution without
the licensing conditions associated with [Docker](https://www.docker.com/pricing/faq/)
, [Colima](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima) offers a compelling
open-source alternative. Compatible with both MacOS and Linux,
Colima facilitates running containers directly using Docker
commands without the need for Docker Desktop.

#### Installing Colima ####

**Prerequisites:** If Docker Desktop is installed on your system,
uninstall it before proceeding.

**Installation Steps:**

1. Install Colima and Docker

>    command-line tools using Homebrew:

Reviewer 2: No need to split this line up:
```suggestion
1. Install Colima and Docker command-line tools using Homebrew:
```

    ```console
    brew install colima docker docker-compose
    ```

1. Verify the installation by starting Colima:

    ```console
    colima start
    ```

>     This initializes the Docker Daemon within a lightweight VM.

Reviewer 2: Remove unnecessary capitalization:
```suggestion
    This initializes the Docker daemon within a lightweight VM.
```

    The first startup may take a moment.

1. Confirm Docker is operational:

    ```console
    docker
    ```

    You should see the Docker usage menu.

1. Verify `docker-compose` is working:

    ```console
    docker-compose
    ```

    The `docker-compose` usage menu should appear.

> ### Optional Configurations ###

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Optional configurations ###
```

> Enhance your Colima setup with the following optionalcon figurations:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Enhance your Colima setup with the following optional configurations:
```

> #### Docker Compose as a Docker Plugin ####

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Docker Compose as a Docker plugin ####
```

Convert `docker-compose` to a Docker plugin for streamlined commands:

1. Create a directory for Docker CLI plugins:

    ```console
    mkdir -p ~/.docker/cli-plugins
    ```

1. Symlink the `docker-compose` command:

    ```console
    ln -sfn $(brew --prefix)/opt/docker-compose/bin/docker-compose ~/.docker/cli-plugins/docker-compose
    ```

1. Verify by running:

    ```console
    docker compose
    ```

    Ensure the `docker-compose` usage menu is displayed.

#### Installing Buildx ####

Buildx is necessary for building some Docker containers:

1. Install Buildx with Homebrew:

    ```console
    brew install docker-buildx
    ```

1. Symlink Buildx to the CLI plugins directory:

    ```console
    ln -sfn $(brew --prefix)/opt/docker-buildx/bin/docker-buildx ~/.docker/cli-plugins/docker-buildx
    ```

> #### Customizing VM Resources ####

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Customizing VM resources ####
```

#### Docker Compose as a Docker plugin ####

Convert `docker-compose` to a Docker plugin for streamlined commands:

1. Create a directory for Docker CLI plugins:

    ```console
    mkdir -p ~/.docker/cli-plugins
    ```

1. Symlink the `docker-compose` command:

    ```console
    ln -sfn $(brew --prefix)/opt/docker-compose/bin/docker-compose ~/.docker/cli-plugins/docker-compose
    ```

1. Verify by running:

    ```console
    docker compose
    ```

    Ensure the `docker compose` usage menu is displayed.

#### Installing Buildx ####

Buildx is necessary for building some Docker containers:

1. Install Buildx with Homebrew:

    ```console
    brew install docker-buildx
    ```

1. Symlink Buildx to the CLI plugins directory:

    ```console
    ln -sfn $(brew --prefix)/opt/docker-buildx/bin/docker-buildx ~/.docker/cli-plugins/docker-buildx
    ```

#### Customizing VM resources ####

To customize the VM's resources, such as CPUs, memory, and disk space:

1. Stop Colima:

    ```console
    colima stop
    ```

1. Restart with desired specifications:

    ```console
    colima start --cpu 4 --memory 4 --disk 100
    ```

> ### Configure Colima's Docker daemon ###

Reviewer 2: Make section heading more accurate:
```suggestion
### Support applications that are unaware of Docker context ###
```

In your .zshrc profile add the following configuration.

```console
# Set env variable for Colima compatibility with Docker
export DOCKER_HOST=unix://$HOME/.colima/default/docker.sock
```

> > **Note**

Reviewer: Prefer [the GitHub Markdown syntax for notes, warnings, cautions, etc.](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/16925):
```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
```

> This configuration directs Docker client tools to communicate with the
> Docker daemon managed by Colima, ensuring that Docker commands and

> > applications (e.g. Molecule) function as expected without Docker Desktop.

Reviewer 2: Add a link to the Colima FAQ:
```suggestion
> applications (e.g. Molecule) function as expected without Docker Desktop.
> For more information, see [here](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima/blob/main/docs/FAQ.md#cannot-connect-to-the-docker-daemon-at-unixvarrundockersock-is-the-docker-daemon-running).
```

> ### Configure Colima's Docker daemon ###
> 
> In your .zshrc profile add the following configuration.
> 
> ```console
> # Set env variable for Colima compatibility with Docker
> export DOCKER_HOST=unix://$HOME/.colima/default/docker.sock
> ```
> 
> > [!NOTE]
> > This configuration directs Docker client tools to communicate with the
> > Docker daemon managed by Colima, ensuring that Docker commands and
> > applications (e.g. Molecule) function as expected without Docker Desktop.
> 

Reviewer 2: Make section heading more accurate and also add a link to the Colima FAQ:
```suggestion
### Support applications that are unaware of Docker context ###

In your .zshrc profile add the following configuration.

```console
# Set env variable for Colima compatibility with Docker
export DOCKER_HOST=unix://$HOME/.colima/default/docker.sock
```

> [!NOTE]
> This configuration directs Docker client tools to communicate with the
> Docker daemon managed by Colima, ensuring that Docker commands and
> applications (e.g. Molecule) function as expected without Docker Desktop.
> For more information, see [here](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima/blob/main/docs/FAQ.md#cannot-connect-to-the-docker-daemon-at-unixvarrundockersock-is-the-docker-daemon-running).

```

packages. We recommend installing all the packages specified in the
[CISA `laptop` script repository](https://github.com/cisagov/laptop/blob/master/Brewfile).

> ### Colima: A Docker alternative ###

Reviewer 4: I would like this whole section to be a sub-section for Docker (above). It still relies on Docker under the hood (by default) and simply provides an alternative for Docker Desktop.

Author: @mcdonnnj see here https://github.com/cisagov/development-guide/pull/96/commits/8ce2503e2986f93318c97fd1ea32a649917c989f

For individuals or businesses seeking a container solution without
the licensing conditions associated with [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/pricing/faq/)
, [Colima](https://github.com/abiosoft/colima) offers a compelling

> open-source alternative. Compatible with both MacOS and Linux,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
open-source alternative. Compatible with both macOS and Linux,
```

Colima facilitates running containers directly using Docker
commands without the need for Docker Desktop.

#### Installing Colima ####

**Prerequisites:** If Docker Desktop is installed on your system,
uninstall it before proceeding.

**Installation Steps:**

1. Install Colima and Docker command-line tools using Homebrew:

    ```console
    brew install colima docker docker-compose
    ```

1. Verify the installation by starting Colima:

    ```console
    colima start
    ```

    This initializes the Docker daemon within a lightweight VM.
    The first startup may take a moment.

1. Confirm Docker is operational:

    ```console
    docker
    ```

    You should see the Docker usage menu.

> 1. Verify `docker-compose` is working:

Reviewer 4: Same thing.

```suggestion
1. Verify Docker Compose is working:
```

    ```console

>     docker-compose

Reviewer 4: So that we're consistent with non-macOS usage:

```suggestion
    docker compose
```

    ```

>     The `docker-compose` usage menu should appear.

Reviewer 4: Consistent with how we describe Docker above.
```suggestion
    The Docker Compose usage menu should appear.
```

### Optional configurations ###

Enhance your Colima setup with the following optional configurations:

> #### Docker Compose as a Docker plugin ####

Reviewer 4: So the `docker-compose` formula _is_ the Compose plugin. You can see in the [formula's code](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/blob/277c6de80b2e5ba38b11bf0fff467c1ad8b2fdb3/Formula/d/docker-compose.rb) that it's pulling down the latest version. It just creates a `docker-compose` binary that is symlinked into the plugins directory.

Author: Good catch! Verified it on my end. Everything looks good without the config stuff.

See here: https://github.com/cisagov/development-guide/pull/96/commits/8ce2503e2986f93318c97fd1ea32a649917c989f

Convert `docker-compose` to a Docker plugin for streamlined commands:

1. Create a directory for Docker CLI plugins:

    ```console
    mkdir -p ~/.docker/cli-plugins
    ```

1. Symlink the `docker-compose` command:

    ```console
    ln -sfn $(brew --prefix)/opt/docker-compose/bin/docker-compose ~/.docker/cli-plugins/docker-compose
    ```

1. Verify by running:

    ```console
    docker compose
    ```

    Ensure the `docker compose` usage menu is displayed.

> #### Installing Buildx ####

Reviewer 4: This is also already installed as a Docker plugin by the formula per the [formula's code](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/blob/9b95aa65c9a45fea7159dcf30dd4c256493b77e4/Formula/d/docker-buildx.rb).

Author: See here: https://github.com/cisagov/development-guide/pull/96/commits/8ce2503e2986f93318c97fd1ea32a649917c989f

Buildx is necessary for building some Docker containers:

1. Install Buildx with Homebrew:

    ```console
    brew install docker-buildx
    ```

1. Symlink Buildx to the CLI plugins directory:

    ```console
    ln -sfn $(brew --prefix)/opt/docker-buildx/bin/docker-buildx ~/.docker/cli-plugins/docker-buildx
    ```

#### Customizing VM resources ####

To customize the VM's resources, such as CPUs, memory, and disk space:

1. Stop Colima:

    ```console
    colima stop
    ```

1. Restart with desired specifications:

    ```console
    colima start --cpu 4 --memory 4 --disk 100
    ```

### Support applications that are unaware of Docker context ###

> In your .zshrc profile add the following configuration.

Reviewer 4: So we're not too specific.

```suggestion
In your shell profile (`.bashrc`, `.zshrc`, etc.) add the following configuration.
```

> ```console

Reviewer 4: Since this is actual shell code.

```suggestion
```shell
```
